Why then Cryptocurrency?
So perhaps we can start to see
the appeal of Bitcoin and
other cryptocurrency.
So what Bitcoin
allows one to do is
to perform online transactions
and for that matter,
offline transactions
that do not require
physical cash because that's
very difficult to
deal with online.
So potentially any
transaction for which
a credit card is used or
debit card or PayPal could
be a Bitcoin transaction.
But it accomplishes this
while being decentralized.
So there is no centralized
intermediary.
There is no centralized ledger.
But why would we want
an alternative to credit cards
or other intermediaries?
So let's go through
some possible reasons.
So reason one a
centralized intermediary
has a lot of power.
For instance, it can charge fees.
Should we worry about
the potential for
abuse given the near-monopoly
power for intermediary?
For example, perhaps
the credit card company
might be tempted to tamper
with its centralized ledger.
Might it say remove
some funds for enemies
or reward friends.?
So that's certainly
a possibility,
but probably this
would not happen.
Any credit card company or
a bank that was caught
doing something like
this would not last
very long and it is
very profitable to be
a centralized intermediary.
Centralized
intermediaries have what
is known as franchise value.
It's because of these fees
that they can charge.
So part of what we don't like
about centralized intermediaries
namely their high fees,
which for credit card companies
take the form of
the fees charged to
the merchants and for
banks take the form of
those annoying low deposit rates
that get paid to customers.
Well, we might not like those,
they make it very
profitable to be
a centralized intermediary and
they create franchise value,
and once a company has
franchise value it has
a built-in incentive to behave in
a trustworthy fashion
because it would be very,
very stupid to lose this high
amazing franchise value.
So the current system
is in a sense ensures
its own safety by
allowing intermediaries to have
this high franchise value.
So I don't think reason one is
really a good reason
for Cryptocurrency.
So let's explore
some other reasons.
Reason two is you do not like
centralized intermediaries
for philosophical reasons.
Perhaps you are an extreme
libertarian or an anarchist.
So this describes some people,
but it's probably not universal.
So if we're looking for,
why Bitcoin might have
say, widespread adoption?
Reason two is not
very good either.
Reason three.
So reason three is,
you don't want to use
the centralized intermediary
because you do not want
anybody to know
what you're up to.
The centralized intermediary
keeps records.
Those records could be accessed
by the government under
certain conditions.
Perhaps you do not trust
the government for some reason,
maybe you are doing something
specifically against the law,
perhaps trading with someone
you're not supposed to be
trading with
according to the law,
perhaps trading in
substances that shouldn't
be traded in
according to the law.
So whatever one thinks about
this from a moral standpoint,
it actually is a pretty
good reason to use Bitcoin.
To summarize,
where does this leave
us in terms of Bitcoin?
So for Bitcoin, there
are what we could
call multiple equilibria
in terms of its value.
So one equilibrium for
Bitcoin and the one that
our commentators at
the beginning seemed
to think is going to
persist is that no one uses it.
If this is the case,
then actually it's true
worth really is zero.
This is possible for a currency,
but not safe for stocks.
A currency that nobody uses
has no intrinsic worth.
Now, a potential other
equilibrium is that it is used by
a narrow group of people
and this is what seems to
prevail more or
less at the moment.
Now, the future of
money argument suggests
that perhaps it will
become a dominant medium
of exchange.
Now what's interesting
is that there's
really little middle ground
between two and three.
No matter how much we may
think Bitcoin is cool and
exciting we really
won't want to bother
with a currency that
so few people use.
So whereas some people might have
specific reasons to use
Bitcoin it won't be
dominantly used unless
a critical mass
of people have a reason
to use Bitcoin.
Now we went through
some reasons just
now about why Bitcoin
could replace
the current centralized
intermediaries that allow us to
transact without actually
using dollars but
none of those reasons were
really that convincing.
Does this mean we should conclude
that Bitcoin will forever
be a niche product?
Well, some people
clearly think so,
but it's not really so clear.
Because there's another reason
that people might
want to use cryptocurrency
and that is,
cryptocurrency really is
a currency alternative
to dollars.
Now at the moment,
that's somewhat of
a disadvantage because
the value of Bitcoin
is very volatile.
But that's at the moment.
So what if dollar themselves were
to somehow become untrustworthy?
Well, we're far away
from that at the moment,
but the value of the dollar does
rest in the hands of
the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reserve is in
principle independent,
it should be but
the president of
the United States is also
the commander in chief
who for that matter,
controls the army.
Even if everything
is working well,
the value of the dollar
depends on everyone's
expectations.
It is not entirely in the hands
of the Federal Reserve.
So what could go
wrong that would make
cryptocurrency an
appealing alternative?
Well, two things.
Currently, we are in
a very low inflation regime,
but that might change.
What if we had some level say,
let's say five percent inflation?
So five percent inflation
doesn't sound so bad,
but it is in effect
a tax on everybody who
has to use the currency.
So because of the fiat,
namely because
investors have to hold
dollars to pay off debts
and to pay off taxes,
you have to hold some dollars,
but if the sovereign,
the US government in this case,
freely elected decides
to allow for inflation,
those dollars that you
hold will erode in value.
So in effect, it's
like a tax because
the government gets to spend
the new dollars
that it's printing,
but your dollars that
you hold are worth
less and because of
the fiat you really do
have to hold the dollars.
So in that sense,
having a competitor to dollars
means that perhaps
for the first time
in history residents
of a country are
not trapped by the seigniorage
this is what this is called.
Now, of course, there's
a scarier alternative which
is the currency truly
becoming unstable and
there are, of course,
famous examples of this like
the Weimar Republic from 1921 to
1923 and Venezuela
starting in 2016.
So Bitcoin is specifically
designed with protection
against these.
So these events, especially
the second, are remote,
but it's their possibility that
fuels interests in
Bitcoin at least in part.
So to summarize,
from the point of view of
the end user Bitcoin is
a currency like any other
because Bitcoin is not
recognized as legal tender by
any sovereign at the moment,
zero is always a possible answer
to the question,
what is its value?
So ultimately its value will
depend on whether
it can be used as
a medium of exchange or in fact,
whether people believe it
can be used as a medium of
exchange or actually
whether people believe,
that people believe
it can be used as
a medium of exchange and so on.
So you can see that actually,
beliefs play a role
here and so even if
Bitcoin does not
have a major role as
a medium of exchange
if some people think,
that some people
think it could be
used in the future as a medium of
exchange that is a reason
for it to have a value.
Now, why would it be appealing
as a medium of exchange?
Well, the ease of
transactions without relying
on a centralized intermediary and
it's a currency that's not
prone to manipulation or
instability due to
a central bank.
So the key question is
will Bitcoin remain
a niche product or might
it be widely adopted?
It is not enough for Bitcoin
to have some advantages.
There must be a critical
mass of users who
see these advantages
as important.